Page 1

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
January 29-30, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, January 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Parkinson,2 Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

PRESENT:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Mishkin
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser
Mr. Stern
Mr. Warsh

Ms. Liang and Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher,
Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors

Mr. Clouse, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Ms. Barger2 and Mr. Greenlee,2 Associate Directors, Division of Banking Supervision and
Regulation, Board of Governors
Mr. Gibson,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors

Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms.
Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee

Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors

Messrs. Hoenig, Poole, and Rosengren, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively

Messrs. Durham and Perli, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist

Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Bassett,3 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester,
Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman,
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists

Mr. Doyle,3 Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors

Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account

Ms. Kusko,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

Mr. Struckmeyer,1 Deputy Staff Director, Office of
Staff Director for Management, Board of
Governors

Attended Wednesday’s session.

1

Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors

Attended portion of the meeting relating to the analysis of policy issues raised by financial market developments.
3
Attended portion of the meeting relating to the economic outlook and monetary policy decision.
2

Page 2

Federal Open Market Committee

Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Driscoll, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
San Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Altig and Angulo,2 Mses. Hirtle2 and
Mosser, Messrs. Peters 2 and Rasche, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, New York, New York, New
York, and St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Hakkio, Senior Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City
Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 29, 2008 had been
received and that these individuals had executed their
oaths of office.
The elected members and alternate members were as
follows:
Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First
Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, as alternate.
Charles I. Plosser, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, with Jeffrey M. Lacker, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate.

_

Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate.
Richard W. Fisher, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, with Dennis P. Lockhart, President of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate.
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, with Janet L. Yellen, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market Committee were selected to serve
until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2009:
Ben S. Bernanke
Timothy F. Geithner
Brian F. Madigan
Deborah J. Danker
David W. Skidmore
Michelle A. Smith
Scott G. Alvarez
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr.
Richard M. Ashton
D. Nathan Sheets
David J. Stockton

Chairman
Vice Chairman
Secretary and Economist
Deputy Secretary
Assistant Secretary
Assistant Secretary
General Counsel
Deputy General Counsel
Assistant General
Counsel
Economist
Economist

Thomas A. Connors
William B. English
Steven B. Kamin
Loretta J. Mester
Arthur J. Rolnick
Harvey Rosenblum
Lawrence Slifman
Mark S. Sniderman
Joseph S. Tracy
David W. Wilcox

Associate Economists

By unanimous vote, the Committee made a few
amendments to its rules and to the Program for Security of FOMC Information. The amendments primarily
addressed the Committee’s practice of approving the
minutes via notation vote, attendance at Committee
meetings, and access to Committee information by System employees.
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account.

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
By unanimous vote, William C. Dudley was selected to
serve at the pleasure of the Committee as Manager,
System Open Market Account, on the understanding
that his selection was subject to being satisfactory to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic
Open Market Operations was reaffirmed in the form
shown below:
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN
MARKET OPERATIONS
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008)
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, including securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the
United States in the open market, from or to securities
dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government and
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to allow them to mature without replacement;
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to
principal and interest by, any agency of the United
States, from dealers for the account of the System
Open Market Account under agreements for repurchase of such securities or obligations in 65 business
days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly
authorized by the Committee, shall be determined by
competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual
dealers.
(c) To sell U.S. Government securities and obligations that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed
as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United
States to dealers for System Open Market Account under agreements for the resale by dealers of such securities or obligations in 65 business days or less, at rates

Page 3

that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
Committee, shall be determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual dealers.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
market operations, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securities held in the System Open Market Account to dealers at rates that shall be determined by competitive
bidding. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall
set a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program and apply reasonable limitations
on the total amount of a specific issue that may be auctioned and on the amount of securities that each dealer
may borrow. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York
may reject bids which could facilitate a dealer's ability
to control a single issue as determined solely by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
market operations, while assisting in the provision of
short-term investments for foreign and international
accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York and accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as fiscal agent of the United
States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal Reserve
Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a)
for System Open Market Account, to sell U.S. Government securities to such accounts on the bases set
forth in paragraph l(a) under agreements providing for
the resale by such accounts of those securities in 65
business days or less on terms comparable to those
available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for
New York Bank account, when appropriate, to undertake with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on
purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l(b), repurchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase agreements between its own account and such
foreign, international, and fiscal agency accounts maintained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such
accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may
provide for a service fee when appropriate.
4. In the execution of the Committee’s decision regarding policy during any intermeeting period, the
Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chairman of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in excep-

Page 4

Federal Open Market Committee

tional circumstances the degree of pressure on reserve
positions and hence the intended federal funds rate.
Any such adjustment shall be made in the context of
the Committee’s discussion and decision at its most
recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and shall be based on economic, financial, and
monetary developments during the intermeeting period. Consistent with Committee practice, the Chairman, if feasible, will consult with the Committee before
making any adjustment.
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations with an
amendment to paragraph 1.D. regarding the maximum
open position in all foreign currencies. Accordingly,
the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations
was adopted, as shown below:
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY
OPERATIONS
(Amended January 29, 2008)
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural instructions as the Committee may issue from time to
time:
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign currencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or
forward transactions on the open market at home and
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Treasury,
with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established
by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with
foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other international financial institutions:
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Euro
Pounds sterling
Japanese yen
Mexican pesos
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor
Swiss francs

_

B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding
forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign
currencies listed in paragraph A above.
C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign
banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency
arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that
drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall
be fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount
outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the
Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
D. To maintain an overall open position in all foreign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this
purpose, the overall open position in all foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net
positions in individual currencies, excluding changes in
dollar value due to foreign exchange rate movements
and interest accruals. The net position in a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt,
minus outstanding contracts for future delivery of that
currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements with due
regard to sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for
the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
maximum of 12 months with the following foreign
banks, which are among those designated by the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under
Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the
Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:
Foreign bank
Bank of Canada
Bank of Mexico

Amount of arrangement
(millions of dollars equivalent)
2,000
3,000

Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrangements, and the proposed terms of any new arrangements that may be authorized, shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken
under paragraph 1.A. above shall, unless otherwise ex-

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
pressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing
market rates. For the purpose of providing an investment return on System holdings of foreign currencies
or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or
received in connection with swap drawings, transactions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at
non-market exchange rates.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with foreign central banks for the coordination of foreign currency transactions. In making operating arrangements
with foreign central banks on System holdings of foreign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance,
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Committee. Any agreements or understandings concerning
the administration of the accounts maintained by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign
banks designated by the Board of Governors under
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for review and approval to the Committee.
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to ensure that adequate liquidity is maintained to meet anticipated needs and so that each currency portfolio shall
generally have an average duration of no more than 18
months (calculated as Macaulay duration). Such investments may include buying or selling outright obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof; buying
such securities under agreements for repurchase of
such securities; selling such securities under agreements
for the resale of such securities; and holding various
time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions.
In addition, when appropriate in connection with arrangements to provide investment facilities for foreign
currency holdings, U.S. Government securities may be
purchased from foreign central banks under agreements for repurchase of such securities within 30 calendar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preceding paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee. The
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such
other member of the Board as the Chairman may designate (or in the absence of members of the Board
serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the
absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his

Page 5

alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be
called at the request of any member, or at the request
of the Manager, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or contemplated operations and of consulting with the Manager on other matters relating to his responsibilities. At
the request of any member of the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews and consultations shall
be referred for determination to the Federal Open
Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter
into any needed agreement or understanding with the
Secretary of the Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the
System and the Treasury;
B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully advised concerning System foreign currency operations,
and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations;
C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information to the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies.
8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to
transmit pertinent information on System foreign currency operations to appropriate officials of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the
foreign currency operations for System Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated
January 1, 1944.

By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive
was reaffirmed in the form shown below:
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008)
1. System operations in foreign currencies shall generally be directed at countering disorderly market conditions, provided that market exchange rates for the U.S.

Page 6

Federal Open Market Committee

dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with IMF
Article IV, Section 1.
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales
of foreign exchange.
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrangements with selected foreign central banks.
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks
of other countries and with international monetary institutions.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable
future needs for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting System and
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and to
facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization
Fund.
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly
authorized by the Committee.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be conducted:
A. In close and continuous consultation and cooperation with the United States Treasury;
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign
monetary authorities; and
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of
the United States in the International Monetary Fund
regarding exchange arrangements under IMF Article
IV.
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with
Respect to Foreign Currency Operations were reaffirmed in the form shown below:
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT
TO FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008)

_

In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency
Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Manager, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall
be guided by the following procedural understandings
with respect to consultations and clearances with the
Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and
the Chairman of the Committee. All operations undertaken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported
promptly to the Committee.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or
with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the
time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in
the System's overall open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day
or $600 million since the most recent regular
meeting of the Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a change on
any day in the System's net position in a single
foreign currency exceeding $150 million, or
$300 million when the operation is associated
with repayment of swap drawings.
C. Any operation that might generate a substantial
volume of trading in a particular currency by
the System, even though the change in the System's net position in that currency might be
less than the limits specified in 1.B.
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or
(ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes
that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible
in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the
Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in
the System's overall open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the
most recent regular meeting of the Committee.

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii)
15 percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcommittee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings
by the System and about any operations that are not of
a routine character.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
markets. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the period since the previous meeting. The Manager also
reported on developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market operations in government securities and federal agency obligations during the period since the previous meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The information reviewed at the January meeting,
which included the advance data on the national income and product accounts for the fourth quarter, indicated that economic activity had decelerated sharply
in recent months. The contraction in homebuilding
intensified in the fourth quarter, the growth in consumer spending slowed, and survey measures of both
consumer and business sentiment were at low levels.
In addition, industrial production contracted in the
fourth quarter. Conditions in the labor market deteriorated noticeably, with private payroll employment posting a small decline in December and the unemployment
rate rising. Readings on both headline and core inflation increased in recent months, although the twelvemonth change in prices of core personal consumption
expenditures in December was about the same as its
year-earlier value.
On average, private nonfarm payroll employment in
November and December rose at only about half of
the average pace seen from July to October. Over
2007 as a whole, the deterioration in labor demand was
most pronounced in the construction and financial activities industries, which had been hardest hit by the
difficulties in the housing and mortgage markets.
Manufacturing employment declined yet again in December, while the decrease in employment in retail
trade nearly reversed the sizable increase in that sector
recorded in November. Aggregate hours of production
or nonsupervisory workers were unchanged in December. The unemployment rate rose to 5.0 percent in

Page 7

December after having been at or near 4.7 percent
since September.
Industrial production declined in the fourth quarter, as
a drag from motor vehicles and construction-related
industries more than offset a positive contribution
from other industries. Output in high-tech industries
moderated in the fourth quarter, largely because of a
deceleration in production of computers and semiconductors. Utilities output climbed for a second consecutive quarter, and mining output was boosted by increases in natural gas extraction and in crude oil.
The rise in real consumer spending moderated in the
fourth quarter, with outlays on non-auto consumer
goods increasing weakly. Spending on services rose
solidly in November (the most recent month available),
led by energy services and commissions paid to stockbrokers, but warmer-than-usual temperatures in December likely damped expenditures for energy services
in that month. Sales of light motor vehicles were moderate during the fourth quarter. Real disposable personal income was little changed in the fourth quarter,
held down by higher consumer energy prices. Also, the
wealth-to-income ratio ticked down in the third quarter, and appeared likely to decline again in the fourth
quarter, as equity prices had fallen since the end of the
third quarter and available indicators pointed to continued declines in house prices in the fourth quarter. In
December, readings on consumer sentiment remained
at relatively low levels by historical standards.
Both single-family housing starts and permit issuance
fell in December. Meanwhile, multifamily housing
starts plunged in December, but permit issuance
pointed to a rebound in multifamily starts in the near
term. New home sales dropped in November and December after having held relatively steady since August,
keeping inventories of unsold homes at elevated levels.
Sales of existing homes also moved down in December
but, on balance, had declined less in recent months
than sales of new homes. Demand for housing
through the end of 2007 likely continued to be restrained by tight financing conditions for jumbo and
nonprime mortgages.
Real spending on equipment and software rose at a
sluggish rate in the fourth quarter after having posted a
solid increase in the third quarter. Sales of medium and
heavy trucks edged up after falling to a four-year low.
Spending on high-tech capital goods increased at a
moderate pace over the second half of last year. Out-

Page 8

Federal Open Market Committee

side of the transportation and high-tech sectors, spending on equipment appeared to have declined last quarter after having posted sizable gains over the summer.
Orders and shipments rose somewhat in the fourth
quarter, but imports in the first two months of the
quarter were below their average in the third quarter.
Nonresidential construction remained vigorous in the
fourth quarter. However, indicators of future spending
in this sector pointed to a slowdown in coming
months, with a decline in architectural billings, a rise in
retail-sector vacancy rates, and survey reports that contractors were experiencing more difficulty in obtaining
funding. More generally, surveys of business conditions and sentiment deteriorated and suggested that
capital spending would be reduced in the near term.
Real nonfarm inventory investment excluding motor
vehicles appeared to have stepped up from its average
rate over the first three quarters of 2007. In November, the ratio of manufacturing and trade book-value
inventories (excluding motor vehicles) to sales ticked
down.
The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in
October and then more substantially in November, as
increases in imports in both months more than offset
increases in exports. The increases in imports almost
entirely reflected a jump in the value of imported oil.
Non-oil goods imports were boosted by a large increase in imports of consumer goods and small increases in several other categories, which more than
offset a steep decline in imports of non-oil industrial
supplies. Imports of automotive products and capital
goods recorded modest gains, with the increase in capital goods primarily reflecting a jump in imports of telecommunications equipment. Imports of services grew
strongly. Exports in both months were boosted by
higher exports of services. Exports of industrial supplies also recorded a strong gain, aided by a large increase in exports of fuels in November. Higher exports of semiconductors, aircraft, and machinery
pushed up exports of capital goods, while exports of
agricultural goods increased only slightly following a
large jump in the third quarter. In contrast, exports of
consumer goods fell from their third-quarter level.
Economic growth in the advanced foreign economies
appeared to have slowed in the fourth quarter, with
recent data on household expenditures and retail sales
weakening on balance and consumers and businesses
considerably less upbeat about growth prospects. In
Japan, the estimate of real GDP growth in the third

_

quarter was revised down, and business sentiment declined in December amidst concerns about high oil
prices. In the euro area, retail sales growth declined in
October and November, and consumer and business
surveys in November and December pointed to economic weakness. In the United Kingdom, although
real GDP grew solidly in the fourth quarter, the estimate of third-quarter real GDP growth was revised
down. In Canada, indicators suggested that growth in
economic activity moderated in the fourth quarter.
Private employment shrank in December after having
posted very strong growth in November. Incoming
data on emerging-market economies pointed, on balance, to a slowing of growth in the fourth quarter.
Overall, growth in emerging Asia appeared to have
moderated somewhat in the fourth quarter, with trade
balances declining in several countries as exports
slowed. Readings on economic activity in Latin America were more mixed. Incoming data suggested that
growth slowed in Mexico in the fourth quarter. In Brazil, third-quarter growth was solid, but indicators for
the fourth quarter were mixed. Economic activity appeared to be strong in Argentina in both the third and
fourth quarters.
In the United States, headline consumer price inflation
stepped up noticeably in November and December
from the low rates posted in the summer. Part of the
increase reflected the rapid rise in energy prices, but
prices of core personal consumption expenditures
(PCE) also moved up faster in those months than they
had earlier in the year. The pickup in core PCE inflation over the second half of 2007 reflected an acceleration in prices that had been unusually soft earlier in the
year, such as prices for apparel, prescription drugs, and
nonmarket services. For the year as a whole, core PCE
prices increased at about the same rate as they had in
2006. Household survey measures of expectations for
year-ahead inflation picked up in November and remained at that level in December and January. Households’ longer-term inflation expectations rose in December but ticked down in January. Average hourly
earnings increased faster in November and December
than they had in October, although over the twelve
months that ended in December, this wage measure
rose a bit more slowly than the elevated pace posted in
2006.
At its December meeting, the FOMC lowered its target
for the federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4¼ percent. In addition, the Board of Governors approved a
decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate, to 4¾

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
percent, leaving the gap between the federal funds rate
target and the discount rate at 50 basis points. The
Committee’s statement noted that incoming information suggested that economic growth was slowing, reflecting the intensification of the housing correction
and some softening in business and consumer spending. Moreover, strains in financial markets had increased in recent weeks. The Committee indicated that
its action, combined with the policy actions taken earlier, should help promote moderate growth over time.
Readings on core inflation had improved modestly during the year, but elevated energy and commodity prices,
among other factors, might put upward pressure on
inflation. In this context, the Committee judged that
some inflation risk remained and said that it would
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
Recent developments, including the deterioration in
financial market conditions, had increased the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth
and inflation. The Committee stated that it would continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and would act as
needed to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth.
Over the intermeeting period, the expected path of
monetary policy over the next year as measured by
money market futures rates tilted down sharply, primarily in response to softer-than-expected economic
data releases. The Committee’s action at its December
meeting was largely anticipated by market participants,
although some investors were surprised by the absence
of any indication of accompanying measures to address
strains in term funding markets. Some of that surprise
was reversed the next day, following the announcement
of a Term Auction Facility (TAF) and associated swap
lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss
National Bank. The subsequent release of the minutes
of the meeting elicited little market reaction. However,
investors did mark down the expected path of policy in
response to speeches by Federal Reserve officials; the
speeches were interpreted as suggesting that signs of
broader economic weakness and additional financial
strains would likely require an easier stance of policy.
The Committee’s decision to reduce the target federal
funds rate 75 basis points on January 22 surprised market participants and led investors to mark down further
the path of policy over the next few months. Consistent with the shift in the economic outlook, the revision in policy expectations, and the reduction in the
target federal funds rate, yields on nominal Treasury
coupon securities declined substantially over the period

Page 9

since the December FOMC meeting. The yield curve
steepened somewhat further, with the two-year yield
dropping more than the ten-year yield. Near-term inflation compensation increased in early January amid
rising oil prices, but it retreated in later weeks, along
with oil prices, and declined, on net, over the period.
Conditions in short-term funding markets improved
notably over the intermeeting period, but strains remained. Spreads of rates on securities in interbank
funding markets over risk-free rates narrowed somewhat following the announcement of the TAF on December 12 and eased considerably after year-end, although they remained at somewhat elevated levels.
Spreads of rates on asset-backed commercial paper
over risk-free rates also fell, on net, and the level of
such paper outstanding increased in the first two weeks
of January for the first time since August. In longerterm corporate markets, yields on investment-grade
corporate bonds fell less than those on comparablematurity Treasury securities, while yields on speculative-grade bonds rose considerably. As a result, corporate bond spreads climbed to their highest levels since
early 2003, apparently reflecting increased concern
among investors about the outlook for corporate credit
quality over the next few years. Nonetheless, gross
bond issuance in December remained strong. Commercial bank credit expanded briskly in December,
supported by robust growth in business loans and in
nonmortgage loans to households, and in the face of
survey reports of tighter lending conditions. Over the
intermeeting period, spreads on conforming mortgages
over comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained
about flat, as did spreads on jumbo mortgages, although credit availability for jumbo-mortgage borrowers continued to be tight. Broad stock price indexes
fell over the intermeeting period on perceptions of a
deteriorating economic outlook and additional writedowns by financial institutions. Similar stresses were
again evident in the financial markets of major foreign
economies. The trade-weighted foreign exchange value
of the dollar against major currencies declined slightly,
on balance, over the intermeeting period.
Debt in the domestic nonfinancial sector was estimated
to have increased somewhat more slowly in the fourth
quarter than in the third. The rate of increase of nonfinancial business debt decelerated in the fourth quarter
from its rapid third-quarter pace despite robust bond
issuance as the rise in commercial and industrial lending moderated. Household mortgage debt expanded at
a slow rate in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued

Page 10

Federal Open Market Committee

weakness in home prices, declining home sales, and
tighter credit conditions for some borrowers. Nonmortgage consumer credit appeared to expand at a
moderate pace. In December, the increase in M2 was
up slightly from its November pace, boosted primarily
by inflows into the relative safety and liquidity of
money market mutual funds. The rise in small time
deposits moderated but remained elevated, as several
thrift institutions offered attractive deposit rates to secure funding. In contrast, liquid deposits continued to
increase weakly and currency contracted noticeably, the
latter apparently reflecting an ongoing trend in overseas
demand away from U.S. dollar bank notes and towards
the euro and other currencies.
In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff revised up slightly its estimated increase in aggregate economic activity in the fourth quarter of 2007 but revised
down its projected increase for the first half of 2008.
Although data on consumer spending and nonresidential construction activity for the fourth quarter had
come in above the staff’s expectations, most of the information received over the intermeeting period was
weaker than had been previously expected. The drop
in housing activity continued to intensify, conditions in
labor markets appeared to have deteriorated noticeably
near year-end, and factory output had weakened. Consumer confidence remained low, and indicators of
business sentiment had worsened. Equity prices had
also fallen sharply so far in 2008, and, while the functioning of money markets had improved, conditions in
some other financial markets had become more restrictive. The staff projection showed the weakness in
spending dissipating over the second half of 2008 and
2009, in response to the cumulative easing of monetary
policy since August, the abatement of housing weakness, a lessening drag from high oil prices, and the
prospect of fiscal stimulus. Still, projected resource
utilization was lower over the next two years than in
the previous forecast. The projection for core PCE
price inflation in 2008 was raised slightly in response to
elevated readings in recent months. The forecast for
headline PCE price inflation also incorporated a somewhat higher rate of increase for energy prices for the
first half of 2008; as a result, headline PCE price inflation was now expected to exceed core PCE price inflation slightly for that year. The forecasts for both headline and core PCE price inflation for 2009 were unchanged, with both receding from their 2008 levels.
In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in January, all
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members

_

and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation for the period 2008 through 2010. The projections
are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
In their discussion of the economic situation and outlook, and in the projections that they had submitted for
this meeting, participants noted that information received since the December meeting had been decidedly
downbeat on balance. In particular, the drop in housing activity had intensified, factory output had weakened, news on business investment had been soft, and
conditions in labor markets appeared to have deteriorated. In addition, consumer confidence had remained
low and business confidence appeared to have worsened. Although the functioning of money markets had
improved notably, strains remained evident in a number of other financial markets, and credit conditions
had become generally more restrictive. Against this
backdrop, participants expected economic growth to
remain weak in the first half of this year before picking
up in the second half, aided in part by a more accommodative stance of monetary policy and by likely fiscal
stimulus. Further ahead, participants judged that economic growth would continue to pick up gradually in
2009 and 2010. Nonetheless, with housing activity and
house prices still declining and with financial conditions
for businesses and households tightening further, significant uncertainties surrounded this outlook and the
risks to economic growth in the near term appeared to
be weighted to the downside. Indeed, several participants noted that the risks of a downturn in the economy were significant. Inflation data had been disappointing in recent months, and a few participants cited
anecdotal reports that some firms were able to pass on
costs to consumers. However, with inflation expectations anticipated to remain reasonably well anchored,
energy and other commodity prices expected to flatten
out, and pressures on resources likely to ease, participants generally expected inflation to moderate somewhat in coming quarters.
Meeting participants observed that conditions in shortterm funding markets had improved considerably since
the December meeting, reflecting the easing of pressures related to funding around the turn of the year as
well as the implementation of the TAF. However,
broader financial conditions had tightened significantly,
on balance, in the weeks leading up to the meeting, as
evidence of further deterioration in housing markets

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
and investors’ more pessimistic view of the economic
outlook adversely affected a range of financial markets.
Many participants were concerned that the drop in equity prices, coupled with the ongoing decline in house
prices, implied reductions in household wealth that
would likely damp consumer spending. Moreover, elevated volatility in financial markets likely reflected increased uncertainty about the economic outlook, and
that greater uncertainty could lead firms and households to limit spending. The availability of credit to
consumers and businesses appeared to be tightening,
likely adding to restraint on economic growth. Participants discussed the risks to financial markets and institutions posed by possible further deterioration in the
condition of financial guarantors, and many perceived a
possibility that additional downgrades in these firms’
credit ratings could put increased strains on financial
markets. To be sure, some positive financial developments were evident. Banks appeared to be making
some progress in strengthening their balance sheets,
with several financial institutions able to raise significant amounts of capital to offset the large losses they
had suffered in recent quarters. Nevertheless, participants generally viewed financial markets as still vulnerable to additional economic and credit weakness. Some
noted the especially worrisome possibility of an adverse
feedback loop, that is, a situation in which a tightening
of credit conditions could depress investment and consumer spending, which, in turn, could feed back to a
further tightening of credit conditions.
In their discussion of individual sectors of the economy, meeting participants emphasized that activity in
housing markets had continued to deteriorate sharply.
With single-family permits and starts still falling, sales
of new homes dropping precipitously, sales of existing
homes flat, and inventories of unsold homes remaining
elevated even in the face of falling house prices, several
participants noted the absence of signs of stabilization
in the sector. Of further concern were the reduced
availability of nonconforming loans and the apparent
tightening by banks of credit standards on mortgages,
both of which had the potential for intensifying the
housing contraction. The recent declines in interest
rates had spurred a surge in applications for mortgage
refinancing and would limit the upward resets on the
rates on outstanding adjustable-rate mortgages, both of
which would tend to improve some households’ finances. Nonetheless, participants viewed the housing
situation and its potential further effect on employment, income, and wealth as one of the major sources
of downside risk to the economic outlook.

Page 11

Recent data as well as anecdotal information indicated
that consumer spending had decelerated considerably,
perhaps partly reflecting a spillover from the weakness
in the housing sector. Participants remarked that declining house prices and sales appeared to be depressing consumer sentiment and that the contraction in
wealth associated with decreases in home and equity
prices probably was restraining spending. In addition,
consumption expenditures were being damped by
slower growth in real disposable income induced by
high energy prices and possibly by a softening of the
labor market. The December employment report
showed that job growth had slowed appreciably, and
other indicators also pointed to emerging weakness in
the labor market in the intermeeting period. And
spending in the future could be affected by an ongoing
tightening in the availability of consumer credit amid
signs that lenders were becoming increasingly cautious
in view of some deterioration of credit performance on
consumer loans and widening expectations of slower
income growth. Some participants, however, cited evidence that workers in some sectors were still in short
supply and saw signs that the labor market remained
resilient.
The outlook for business investment had turned
weaker as well since the time of the December meeting.
Several participants reported that firms in their districts
were reducing capital expenditures in anticipation of a
slowing in sales. Manufacturing activity appeared to
have slowed or contracted in many districts. Although
a few participants reported more upbeat attitudes
among firms in the technology and energy sectors,
business sentiment overall appeared to be declining.
Moreover, a number of indicators pointed to a tightening in credit availability to businesses. For example, the
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending
Practices indicated that banks had tightened lending
standards and pricing terms on business loans. Lending standards had been raised especially sharply on
commercial real estate loans. While real outlays for
nonresidential construction apparently continued to
rise through the fourth quarter, anecdotal evidence
pointed to a weakening of commercial real estate
spending in several districts, with some projects being
canceled or scaled back.
Most participants anticipated that a fiscal stimulus
package, including tax rebates for households and bonus depreciation allowances for businesses, would be
enacted before long and would support economic
growth in the second half of the year. Some pointed

Page 12

Federal Open Market Committee

out, however, that the fiscal stimulus package might
not help in the near term, when the risks of a downturn
in economic activity appeared largest. In addition, the
effects of the proposed package would likely be temporary, with the stimulus reversing in 2009.
With regard to the external sector, some participants
noted that growth abroad had recently been strong and
that increasing U.S. exports had been a significant
source of strength for the U.S. economy of late. However, available data suggested that economic activity
outside the United States appeared to be decelerating
somewhat. Although slowing foreign growth would
reduce a source of support for the U.S. economy at the
same time that domestic spending was slackening, it
could also damp commodity prices and help reduce
global price pressures.
Participants agreed that the inflation data that were
received since the December meeting had been disappointing. But many believed that the slow growth in
economic activity anticipated for the first half of this
year and the associated slack in resource utilization
would contribute to an easing of price pressures.
Moreover, a leveling-off of energy and commodity
prices such as that embedded in futures markets would
also help moderate inflation pressures. However, some
participants cautioned that commodity prices had remained stubbornly high for quite some time and that
inferences drawn in the past from futures markets
about likely trends in such prices had often proven inaccurate. Participants also related anecdotal evidence
of firms facing increasing input cost pressures and in
some cases being able to pass on those costs to consumers. Moreover, headline inflation had been generally above 2 percent over the past four years, and participants noted that such persistently elevated readings
could ultimately affect inflation expectations. Some
survey measures of inflation expectations had edged up
in recent months, and longer-term financial market
gauges of inflation compensation had climbed. The
latter probably reflected at least in part increased uncertainty—inflation risk—rather than greater inflation expectations; increases in nominal wages did not appear
to be incorporating higher inflation expectations. On
balance, expectations seemed to remain fairly well anchored, but participants agreed that continued stability
of inflation expectations was essential.
In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeeting period, most members believed that a further significant easing in policy was warranted at this meeting

_

to address the considerable worsening of the economic
outlook since December as well as increased downside
risks. As had been the case in some previous cyclical
episodes, a relatively low real federal funds rate now
appeared appropriate for a time to counter the factors
that were restraining economic growth, including the
slide in housing activity and prices, the tightening of
credit availability, and the drop in equity prices. Members judged that a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate, together with the Committee’s previous
policy actions, would bring the real short-term rate to a
level that was likely to help the economy expand at a
moderate pace over time. Still, with no signs of stabilization in the housing sector and with financial conditions not yet stabilized, the Committee agreed that
downside risks to growth would remain even after this
action. Members were also mindful of the need for
policy to promote price stability, and some noted that,
when prospects for growth had improved, a reversal of
a portion of the recent easing actions, possibly even a
rapid reversal, might be appropriate. However, most
members agreed that a 50 basis point easing at this
meeting would likely not contribute to an increase in
inflation pressures given the actual and expected weakness in economic growth and the consequent reduction
in pressures on resources. Rather, members agreed
that inflation was likely to moderate in coming quarters,
but they also concurred that it would be necessary to
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
The Committee agreed that the statement to be released after the meeting should indicate that financial
markets remained under considerable stress, that credit
had tightened further for some businesses and households, and that recent information pointed to a deepening of the housing contraction as well as to some softening in labor markets. The Committee again viewed
it as appropriate to indicate that it expected inflation to
moderate in coming quarters but also to emphasize that
it would be necessary to monitor inflation developments carefully. The action taken at the meeting, combined with the cumulative policy easing already in
place, should help to promote moderate growth over
time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity.
However, members concurred that downside risks to
growth remained, and that the Committee would continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and would act in a
timely manner as needed to address those risks.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 3 percent.”
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided
today to lower its target for the federal funds
rate 50 basis points to 3 percent.
Financial markets remain under considerable
stress, and credit has tightened further for some
businesses and households. Moreover, recent
information indicates a deepening of the housing
contraction as well as some softening in labor
markets.
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
Today’s policy action, combined with those
taken earlier, should help to promote moderate
growth over time and to mitigate the risks to
economic activity. However, downside risks to
growth remain. The Committee will continue to
assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a
timely manner as needed to address those risks.”
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner,
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs.
Plosser, Stern, and Warsh.
Votes against this action: Mr. Fisher.
Mr. Fisher dissented because he preferred to leave the
federal funds rate unchanged. The rate had been lowered by 75 basis points just one week earlier in a decision he supported, which brought the funds rate down
175 basis points since September. Given these actions,
he felt that monetary policy was already quite stimulative, while headline inflation was too high at more than

Page 13

3 percent over the last year. Demand-pull inflation
pressures from emerging-market economies abroad
appeared to be continuing, and anecdotal reports from
business contacts suggested greater willingness domestically to pass rising costs through to prices. Moreover,
Mr. Fisher was concerned that inflation expectations
could become unanchored if the perception of negative
real rates of interest were to become pervasive. At the
same time, the economy appeared to be still growing,
albeit at a substantially weakened pace. Given the policy tradeoffs confronting the FOMC at this time, Mr.
Fisher saw the upside risks to inflation as being greater
than the downside risks to longer-term economic
growth, especially in light of the recent, aggressive easing of monetary policy and the lag before it would have
its full effect on the economy.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of selected
longer-term regulatory and structural issues raised by
recent financial market developments. A staff presentation began by noting that the difficulties in financial
markets started with unexpectedly heavy losses on subprime mortgages and related structured securities,
which led investors to question the valuations of complex structured instruments more generally and to pull
back from such investments. The resulting effects in
markets put pressure on some large banking organizations, particularly through losses on subprimemortgage-related securities and other assets, and
through the unplanned expansion of balance sheets
triggered by the disruption of various markets in which
assets were securitized. The remainder of the presentation, and the discussion by meeting participants, focused on two issues: first, the important role of credit
ratings in the securitization process, including the
methods used to set ratings and the way investors use
ratings in making their investment decisions; and second, how weaknesses in risk management practices at
some large global financial services organizations appear to have led to outsized losses at those institutions,
and the reasons that such weaknesses may have
emerged at some firms and not at others.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, March 18, 2008.
The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on December 31, 2007, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
FOMC meeting held on December 11, 2007.

Page 14

Federal Open Market Committee

Conference Calls
On January 9, 2008, the Committee reviewed recent
economic data and financial market developments.
The available information suggested that the downside
risks to growth had increased significantly since the
time of the December FOMC meeting. Participants
discussed the possibility that the slowing in economic
growth and associated softening in labor markets might
exacerbate the tightening in credit conditions and the
correction in housing market activity and prices, which
could in turn weigh further on economic activity. Participants emphasized the risks that such adverse dynamics could pose to economic and financial stability.
Participants noted that core price inflation had edged
up in recent months, boosted in part by the passthrough of higher energy costs to the prices of core
consumer goods and services. Inflation was expected
to edge lower this year as energy prices leveled off and
pressures on resources eased. However, this slowing in
inflation was dependent on inflation expectations remaining well anchored, and participants noted that
considerable uncertainty surrounded the inflation outlook.
Most participants were of the view that substantial additional policy easing in the near term might well be
necessary to promote moderate economic growth over
time and to reduce the downside risks to growth, and
participants discussed the possible timing of such policy actions.
On January 21, 2008, the Committee again met by conference call. Incoming information since the conference call on January 9 had reinforced the view that the
outlook for economic activity was weakening. Among
other developments, strains in some financial markets
had intensified, as it appeared that investors were becoming increasingly concerned about the economic
outlook and the downside risks to activity. Participants
discussed the possibility that these developments could
lead to an excessive pull-back in credit availability and
in investment. Although inflation was expected to
moderate from recent elevated levels, participants
stressed that this outlook relied upon inflation expectations remaining well anchored and that the inflation
situation should continue to be monitored carefully.
All members judged that a substantial easing in policy
in the near term was appropriate to foster moderate
economic growth and reduce the downside risks to
economic activity. Most members judged that an im-

_

mediate reduction in the federal funds rate was called
for to begin aligning the real policy rate with a weakening economic situation. Such an action, by demonstrating the Committee’s commitment to act decisively to
support economic activity, might reduce concerns
about economic prospects that seemed to be contributing to the deteriorating conditions in financial markets,
which could feed back on the economy. However,
some concern was expressed that an immediate policy
action could be misinterpreted as directed at recent
declines in stock prices, rather than the broader economic outlook, and one member believed it preferable
to delay policy action until the scheduled FOMC meeting on January 29-30. Some members also noted that
were policy to become very stimulative it would be important for the Committee to be decisive in reversing
the course of interest rates once the economy had
strengthened and downside risks had abated.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive:
"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with reducing the federal funds rate to an average of around 3½ percent."
The vote encompassed approval of the text below for
inclusion in the statement to be released at 8:30 a.m. on
Tuesday, January 22:
“The Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target for the federal funds
rate 75 basis points to 3½ percent.
The Committee took this action in view of a
weakening of the economic outlook and increasing downside risks to growth. While strains in
short-term funding markets have eased somewhat, broader financial market conditions have
continued to deteriorate and credit has tightened
further for some businesses and households.
Moreover, incoming information indicates a
deepening of the housing contraction as well as
some softening in labor markets.

Minutes of the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
Appreciable downside risks to growth remain.
The Committee will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on
economic prospects and will act in a timely
manner as needed to address those risks.”
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner,
Evans, Hoenig, Kohn, Kroszner, Rosengren, and
Warsh.

Page 15

Votes against this action: Mr. Poole
Absent and not voting: Mr. Mishkin
Mr. Poole dissented because he did not believe that
current conditions justified policy action before the
regularly scheduled meeting the following week.

_____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Secretary

Page 1

Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the January 2008 FOMC meeting,
the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided
projections for economic growth, unemployment, and
inflation in 2008, 2009, and 2010. Projections were
based on information available through the conclusion
of the January meeting, on each participant’s assumptions regarding a range of factors likely to affect economic outcomes, and on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary
policy” is defined as the future policy that, based on
current information, is deemed most likely to foster
outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best
satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the Federal
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected that
output would grow at a pace appreciably below its
trend rate in 2008, owing primarily to a deepening of
the housing contraction and a tightening in the availability of household and business credit, and that the
unemployment rate would increase somewhat. Given
the substantial reductions in the target federal funds
rate through the January FOMC meeting as well as the
assumption of appropriate policy going forward, output
growth further ahead was projected to pick up to a
pace around or a bit above its long-run trend by 2010.
Inflation was expected to decline in 2008 and 2009
from its recent elevated levels as energy prices leveled
out and economic slack contained cost and price increases. Most participants judged that considerable
uncertainty surrounded their projections for output
growth and viewed the risks to their forecasts as
weighted to the downside. A majority of participants
viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly balanced, but a number of participants saw the risks to
inflation as skewed to the upside.
The Outlook
The central tendency of participants’ projections for
real GDP growth in 2008, at 1.3 to 2.0 percent, was
considerably lower than the central tendency of the
projections provided in conjunction with the October
FOMC meeting, which was 1.8 to 2.5 percent. These
downward revisions to the 2008 outlook stemmed
from a number of factors, including a further intensification of the housing market correction, tighter credit
conditions amid increased concerns about credit quality

and ongoing turmoil in financial markets, and higher oil
prices. However, some participants noted that a fiscal
stimulus package would likely provide a temporary
boost to domestic demand in the second half of this
year. Beyond 2008, a number of factors were projected
to buoy economic growth, including a gradual turnaround in housing markets, lower interest rates associated with the substantial easing of monetary policy to
date and appropriate adjustments to policy going forward, and an anticipated reduction in financial market
strains. Real GDP was expected to accelerate somewhat in 2009 and by 2010 to expand at or a little above
participants’ estimates of the rate of trend growth.
With output growth running below trend over the next
year or so, most participants expected that the unemployment rate would edge higher. The central tendency
of participants’ projections for the average rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.2 to
5.3 percent, above the 4.8 to 4.9 percent unemployment rate forecasted in October and broadly suggestive
of some slack in labor markets. The unemployment
rate was generally expected to change relatively little in
2009 and then to edge lower in 2010 as output growth
picks up, although in both years the unemployment
rate was projected to be a little higher than had been
anticipated in October.
The higher-than-expected rates of overall and core inflation since October, which were driven in part by the
steep run-up in oil prices, had caused participants to
revise up somewhat their projections for inflation in
the near term. The central tendency of participants’
projections for core PCE inflation in 2008 was 2.0 to
2.2 percent, up from the 1.7 to 1.9 percent central tendency in October. However, core inflation was expected to moderate over the next two years, reflecting
muted pressures on resources and fairly well-anchored
inflation expectations. Overall PCE inflation was projected to decline from its current elevated rate over the
coming year, largely reflecting the assumption that energy and food prices would flatten out. Thereafter,
overall PCE inflation was projected to move largely in
step with core PCE inflation.
Participants’ projections for 2010 were importantly
influenced by their judgments about the measured rates
of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
mandate to promote maximum employment and price
stability and about the time frame over which policy
should aim to attain those rates given current economic

Page 2

Federal Open Market Committee

conditions. Many participants judged that, given the
recent adverse shocks to both aggregate demand and
inflation, policy would be able to foster only a gradual
return of key macroeconomic variables to their longerrun sustainable or optimal levels. Consequently, the
rate of unemployment was projected by some partici-

_

pants to remain slightly above its longer-run sustainable
level even in 2010, and inflation was judged likely still
to be a bit above levels that some participants judged
would be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
mandate.

Table 1: Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors
and Reserve Bank Presidents
(Percent)

2008

2009

2010

1.3 to 2.0
1.8 to 2.5

2.1 to 2.7
2.3 to 2.7

2.5 to 3.0
2.5 to 2.6

Unemployment rate
October projections

5.2 to 5.3
4.8 to 4.9

5.0 to 5.3
4.8 to 4.9

4.9 to 5.1
4.7 to 4.9

PCE inflation
October projections

2.1 to 2.4
1.8 to 2.1

1.7 to 2.0
1.7 to 2.0

1.7 to 2.0
1.6 to 1.9

Core PCE inflation
October projections

2.0 to 2.2
1.7 to 1.9

1.7 to 2.0
1.7 to 1.9

1.7 to 1.9
1.6 to 1.9

Range2
Growth of real GDP
October projections

1.0 to 2.2
1.6 to 2.6

1.8 to 3.2
2.0 to 2.8

2.2 to 3.2
2.2 to 2.7

Unemployment rate
October projections

5.0 to 5.5
4.6 to 5.0

4.9 to 5.7
4.6 to 5.0

4.7 to 5.4
4.6 to 5.0

PCE inflation
October projections

2.0 to 2.8
1.7 to 2.3

1.7 to 2.3
1.5 to 2.2

1.5 to 2.0
1.5 to 2.0

Core PCE inflation
October projections

1.9 to 2.3
1.7 to 2.0

1.7 to 2.2
1.5 to 2.0

1.4 to 2.0
1.5 to 2.0

Central Tendency1
Growth of real GDP
October projections

Note: Projections of the growth of real GDP, of PCE inflation, and of core PCE inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth
quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage
rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures
and the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy.
Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate
in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on
his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for
each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from
lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008

Page 3

Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*
Real GDP Growth

Percent
6

Central Tendency of Projections
Range of Projections

•

4

•

•

•

•

2004

2005

2006

2007

2
0

2003

2008

2009

Unemployment Rate

2010

Percent
8
7

•

•

6

•

•

5

•

4
3

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

PCE Inflation

2010

Percent
5

•
•

4

•

•

3

•

2
1
0

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Core PCE Inflation

2010

Percent
5
4

•

•

•

•

3

•

2
1
0

2003

2004

2005

* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Page 4

Federal Open Market Committee

Risks to the Outlook
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projections as weighted to the downside and the associated
risks to their projections of unemployment as tilted to
the upside. The possibility that house prices could decline more steeply than anticipated, further reducing
households’ wealth and access to credit, was perceived
as a significant risk to the central outlook for economic
growth and employment. In addition, despite some
recovery in money markets after the turn of the year,
financial market conditions continued to be strained—
stock prices had declined sharply since the December
meeting, concerns about further potential losses at major financial institutions had mounted amid worries
about the condition of financial guarantors, and credit
conditions had tightened in general for both households and firms. The potential for adverse interactions,
in which weaker economic activity could lead to a
worsening of financial conditions and a reduced availability of credit, which in turn could further damp economic growth, was viewed as an especially worrisome
possibility.
Regarding risks to the inflation outlook, several participants pointed to the possibility that real activity could
rebound less vigorously than projected, leading to more
downward pressure on costs and prices than anticipated. However, participants also saw a number of
upside risks to inflation. In particular, the pass-through
of recent increases in energy and commodity prices as
well as of past dollar depreciation to consumer prices
could be greater than expected. In addition, participants recognized a risk that inflation expectations could
become less firmly anchored if the current elevated
rates of inflation persisted for longer than anticipated
or if the recent substantial easing in monetary policy
was misinterpreted as reflecting less resolve among
Committee members to maintain low and stable inflation. On balance, a larger number of participants than
in October viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts
as broadly balanced, although several participants continued to indicate that their inflation projections were
skewed to the upside.
The ongoing financial market turbulence and tightening
of credit conditions had increased participants’ uncertainty about the outlook for economic activity. Most
participants judged that the uncertainty attending their
January projections for real GDP growth and for the
unemployment rate was above typical levels seen in the
past. (Table 2 provides an estimate of average ranges
of forecast uncertainty for GDP growth, unemploy-

_

ment, and inflation over the past twenty years.1) In
contrast, the uncertainty attached to participants’ inflation projections was generally viewed as being broadly
in line with past experience, although several participants judged that the degree of uncertainty about inflation was higher than normal.
Table 2: Average Historical Projection Error
Ranges
(Percentage Points)

Real GDP1
Unemployment
rate2
Total consumer
prices3

2008

2009

2010

±1.2

±1.4

±1.4

±0.5

±0.8

±1.0

±1.0

±1.0

±0.9

Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections that were
released in the winter from 1986 through 2006 for the current and following two years by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook
from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November).
1. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
previous year to fourth quarter of the year indicated.
2. Projection is the fourth quarter average of the civilian
unemployment rate (percent).
3. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price
measure that has been most widely used in government and
private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change,
fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. The slightly narrower estimated width of
the confidence interval for inflation in the third year compared with those for the second and third years is likely the
result of using a limited sample period for computing these
statistics.

Diversity of Participants’ Views
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diversity of participants’ views. The dispersion of participants’ projections for real GDP growth was markedly
wider than in the forecasts submitted in October,
which in turn were considerably more diverse than
The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty
and risks attending participants’ projections.

1

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008
those submitted in conjunction with the June FOMC
meeting and included in the Board’s Monetary Policy Report to the Congress in July. Mirroring the increase in diversity of views on real GDP growth, the dispersion of
participants’ projections for the rate of unemployment
also widened notably, particularly for 2009 and 2010.
The dispersion of projections for output and employment seemed largely to reflect differing assessments of
the effect of financial market conditions on real activity, the speed with which credit conditions might improve, and the depth and duration of the housing market contraction. The dispersion of participants’ longerterm projections was also affected to some degree by
differences in their judgments about the economy’s
trend growth rate and the unemployment rate that
would be consistent over time with maximum em-

Page 5

ployment. Views also differed about the pace at which
output and employment would recover toward those
levels over the forecast horizon and beyond, given appropriate monetary policy. The dispersion of the projections for PCE inflation in the near term partly reflected different views on the extent to which recent
increases in energy and other commodity prices would
pass through into higher consumer prices and on the
influence that inflation expectations would exert on
inflation over the short and medium run. Participants’
inflation projections further out were influenced by
their views of the rate of inflation consistent with the
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives and the time it would
take to achieve these goals given current economic
conditions and appropriate policy.

Page 6

Federal Open Market Committee

_

Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
Real GDP
2008

Unemployment Rate
2008

Number of Participants

January Projections
October Projections

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3

2009

Number of Participants

January Projections
October Projections

4.6 4.7

4.8 4.9

5.0 5.1

5.2 5.3

2009

Number of Participants

5.4 5.5

5.6 5.7

Number of Participants

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3

2010

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
4.6 4.7

4.8 4.9

5.0 5.1

5.2 5.3

2010

Number of Participants

5.4 5.5

5.6 5.7

Number of Participants

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
4.6 4.7

4.8 4.9

5.0 5.1

5.2 5.3

5.4 5.5

5.6 5.7

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of January 29-30, 2008

Page 7

Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
PCE Inflation
2008

Core PCE Inflation

Number of Participants

January Projections
October Projections

1.5 1.6

2008

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

2009

2.5 2.6

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

2.7 2.8

Number of Participants

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

January Projections
October Projections

1.3 1.4

1.5 1.6

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2009

Number of Participants

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

Number of Participants

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.5 1.6

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

2010

2.5 2.6

2.7 2.8

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.3 1.4

1.5 1.6

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2010

Number of Participants

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

Number of Participants

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.5 1.6

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

2.5 2.6

2.7 2.8

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.3 1.4

1.5 1.6

1.7 1.8

1.9 2.0

2.1 2.2

2.3 2.4

Page 8

Federal Open Market Committee

Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks help shape monetary policy and can aid public
understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these
projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to
help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world.
And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider
not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their
projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur.
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated
with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and
2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported
in table 2 might imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand
between 1.8 percent to 4.2 percent in the current year, and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in
the second and third years. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1 percent to 3 percent in the current and second years, and 1.1
percent to 2.9 percent in the third year.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history,
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are
broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with divergences across a number of different projections.

_

