Page 1

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 3-4, 2009
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System was held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 3,
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, November 4, 2009, at 9:00 a.m.

Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Governors

PRESENT:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke
Mr. Evans
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Lacker
Mr. Lockhart
Mr. Tarullo
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Yellen

Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors

Mr. Bullard, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr.
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,
Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman,
Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate
Economists
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account

Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Senior
Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reifschneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Leahy,¹ Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Ihrig, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Messrs. Fuhrer and Sniderman, Executive Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and Cleveland, respectively

Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to financial
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors

developments, open market operations, and System facilities.

Page 2

Federal Open Market Committee

Mr. Barkema, Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Mr.
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York,
and St. Louis, respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Burke and Ms. Yucel, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, respectively
Ms. Sbordone and Mr. Sill, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York
and Philadelphia, respectively
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond
Developments in Financial Markets and the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
reported on recent developments in domestic and foreign financial markets. The Manager also reported on
System open market operations in Treasury securities,
agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) since the Committee’s September 22-23 meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified those
transactions. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the
intermeeting period. Since the Committee met in September, the Federal Reserve’s total assets were about
unchanged, on balance, at approximately $2.2 trillion,
as the increase in the System’s holdings of securities
roughly matched a further decline in usage of the System’s credit and liquidity facilities. The Manager noted
that, as of October 30, $300 billion in Treasury securities had been purchased, as directed by the Committee.
Overall, the Treasury market had recovered substantially from the strains during the financial crisis, and the
Manager reported that the completion of the Federal
Reserve’s purchase program did not appear to have led
to any significant upward pressure on Treasury yields
or to any notable deterioration in Treasury market
functioning. There was little evidence, to date, of a
buildup in year-end funding pressures, although demand for Treasury bills with maturities extending just
beyond the year-end seemed to be elevated. The Manager noted that the recent path of purchases of agency
debt was consistent with buying a cumulative amount
of $175 billion by the end of the first quarter of 2010.

_

The staff briefed the Committee on recent developments regarding various Federal Reserve liquidity and
credit facilities, including the Term Auction Facility
(TAF), the primary credit program, the Term AssetBacked Securities Loan Facility (TALF), and the swap
lines with foreign central banks. Usage of these facilities had been declining in recent months as financial
market conditions continued to improve. On September 24, the Board of Governors announced a gradual
reduction in amounts to be auctioned under the TAF
through January and indicated that auctions of credit
with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased
out. The staff reviewed the changes that had been
made since the onset of the crisis to the terms of the
primary credit program, including loan maturities and
interest rates. The staff noted that reducing the maximum maturity of loans available under the primary
credit program from 90 days to 28 days would
represent another step toward normalization of the
Federal Reserve’s policy-implementation framework
and would align the maximum maturities of the primary credit program with those under the TAF, but no
action on this matter was taken by the Board at this
meeting. Regarding the TALF, the staff indicated that
auto and credit card asset-backed security issuance was
increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources; however, commercial MBS remained more dependent on
TALF financing.
The staff presented another update on the continuing
development of several tools that could help support a
smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation at the
appropriate time. These measures include executing
reverse repurchase agreements (RPs) on a large scale,
potentially with counterparties other than the primary
dealers; implementing a term deposit facility, available
to depository institutions, to reduce the supply of reserve balances; and taking steps to tighten the link between the interest rate paid on reserve balances held at
the Federal Reserve Banks and the federal funds rate.
The staff had made considerable further progress on
these tools. Participants expressed confidence that the
Committee would be in a position to remove policy
accommodation when appropriate by raising the rate of
interest paid on excess reserves and by employing reserve-management tools such as reverse RPs, term deposits, and, if desirable, asset sales. Completing the
operational work necessary to establish reverse RPs and
term deposits as tools that can drain large volumes of
reserves was viewed as an important near-term objective. Participants anticipated that the Federal Reserve
would conduct tests of these tools, but they stressed

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009
that such testing would not imply that these tools
would be employed for policy purposes any time soon.
Participants expressed a range of views about how the
Committee might use its various tools in combination
to foster most effectively its dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability. As part of the
Committee’s strategy for eventual exit from the period
of extraordinary policy accommodation, several participants thought that asset sales could be a useful tool to
reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
and lower the level of reserve balances, either prior to
or concurrently with increasing the policy rate. In their
view, such sales would help reinforce the effectiveness
of paying interest on excess reserves as an instrument
for firming policy at the appropriate time and would
help quicken the restoration of a balance sheet composition in which Treasury securities were the predominant asset. Other participants had reservations about
asset sales—especially in advance of a decision to raise
policy interest rates—and noted that such sales might
elicit sharp increases in longer-term interest rates that
could undermine attainment of the Committee’s goals.
Furthermore, they believed that other reserve management tools such as reverse RPs and term deposits
would likely be sufficient to implement an appropriate
exit strategy and that assets could be allowed to run off
over time, reflecting prepayments and the maturation
of issues. Participants agreed to continue to evaluate
various potential policy-implementation tools and the
possible combinations and sequences in which they
might be used. They also agreed that it would be important to develop communication approaches for
clearly explaining to the public the use of these tools
and the Committee’s exit strategy more broadly.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
The information reviewed at the November 3-4 meeting suggested that overall economic activity continued
to rise in recent months. Manufacturers increased production in September for the third consecutive month.
The gradual recovery in construction of single-family
homes from its extremely low level earlier in the year
continued, and home sales increased in the third quarter. Although consumer spending on motor vehicles
declined in September after the expiration of government rebates, other household spending rose. Outlays
for equipment and software (E&S) appeared to be stabilizing. However, the labor market weakened further,
and business spending on nonresidential structures
continued to decline. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation remained subdued in recent months.

Page 3

The labor market continued to weaken in September,
but the pace of deterioration lessened from that seen
earlier in the year. Job losses remained widespread
across industries. The length of the average workweek
for production and nonsupervisory workers decreased,
and the index of aggregate hours worked for this group
fell, albeit more slowly than earlier in the year. In the
household survey, the unemployment rate rose in September to 9.8 percent, and the labor force participation
rate fell to its lowest level of the year. Continuing
claims for unemployment insurance through regular
state programs declined through early October, but
total claims, including those for extended and emergency benefits, remained high.
Industrial production rose in September for the third
consecutive month. A substantial portion of the thirdquarter gain was directly attributable to a rebound in
motor vehicle assemblies and related parts production,
but increases in production were widespread across the
industrial sector. Indicators from business surveys suggested that there would be further gains in factory output over the near term. Nevertheless, considerable
slack remained in the manufacturing sector, as the factory utilization rate for September was up only a bit
from its historical low earlier this year.
For the third quarter as a whole, real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose at a solid rate, with
noticeable increases in motor vehicles, furniture, electronics, and other durable goods. However, real outlays declined in September after a sharp increase in August. The monthly pattern in expenditures was significantly affected by swings in motor vehicle sales during
and after the government’s “cash-for-clunkers” program. Real disposable personal income fell for the
fourth consecutive month in September, reflecting the
weakness in the labor market. Poor labor market conditions and prior declines in household net worth appeared to have weighed on consumer sentiment, and
the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on
Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) suggested that many
banking institutions continued to tighten standards for
consumer lending in the third quarter.
The housing sector continued to recover, on balance.
Although single-family starts were about flat in September, the number of starts was well above the record
low reached in the first quarter of the year. In the
much smaller multifamily sector, where tight credit
conditions persisted and vacancies remained elevated,
starts were about unchanged. Sales of new homes, although down a bit in September, rose over the third

Page 4

Federal Open Market Committee

quarter as a whole. The inventory of unsold new
homes declined further, as sales outpaced construction.
Sales of existing single-family homes increased in September and for the quarter as a whole, and recent resale
activity appeared to be driven primarily by transactions
of nondistressed properties. The average interest rate
on 30-year conforming fixed-rate mortgages remained
very low over the intermeeting period. Although some
house price indexes had risen in recent months, such
indexes remained below year-earlier levels.
Real spending on E&S appeared to have stabilized in
the third quarter. Real business outlays on high-tech
E&S increased modestly further, outlays for aircraft
posted another gain, and business investment in motor
vehicles and other areas was down only slightly. The
improvements in a number of the fundamental determinants of investment in E&S, including a decline in
the cost of capital and a rise in business output, suggested further, albeit sluggish, gains in spending over
the next few quarters. The responses to the October
SLOOS indicated that banks continued to tighten standards on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to
firms. Meanwhile, conditions in the nonresidential
construction sector generally remained quite poor. The
recent trend in architectural billings was consistent with
further declines in nonresidential construction, and
employment in the sector continued to decline. The
October SLOOS suggested that financing for new construction projects was very difficult for businesses to
obtain. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated
that businesses continued to liquidate inventories in the
third quarter, but at a slower rate than in the preceding
quarter.
In August, the U.S. international trade deficit narrowed,
as exports edged up and imports declined, but it remained wider than it had been at its recent low point in
May. The increase in exports of goods and services
was held down by a sharp drop in the volatile aircraft
category. The decline in imports of goods and services
was led by a lower volume of imported oil. In contrast,
imports of machinery, automotive products, and industrial supplies increased.
Indicators of economic activity in the advanced foreign
economies during the third quarter were mixed, but
consistent with economic recovery in the aggregate. In
most countries, purchasing managers surveys were at
levels consistent with expansion, and many indicators
of consumer and business confidence continued to
show improvement. Economic indicators were strongest in Japan and the euro area, where industrial produc-

_

tion rebounded sharply. In contrast, real gross domestic product (GDP) contracted in the United Kingdom
in the third quarter, and real GDP in Canada edged
down in July and August. In most emerging market
economies, recent data showed that economic recovery
continued in the third quarter. Real GDP increased
strongly in China, Korea, and Singapore, and the recovery in Brazil continued. In Mexico, available data
suggested that activity had begun to expand after several quarters of contraction. Across most of the major
foreign economies, price pressures remained subdued.
Twelve-month inflation remained elevated but declined
further in Mexico and Brazil.
In the United States, recent monthly data indicated that
consumer price inflation remained subdued. The PCE
price index moved up only a bit in September as increases in energy prices were largely offset by declines
in food prices. Core PCE prices also edged up during
the month. Gasoline prices rose again in October.
Median year-ahead inflation expectations in the final
October Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
Consumers increased, remaining higher than at the turn
of the year, but longer-term inflation expectations from
this survey were about unchanged. Measures of labor
compensation rose moderately in the third quarter after
decelerating significantly in the first half of the year.
The employment cost index for wages and salaries was
boosted by increases in several industry categories that
might have been affected by the rise in the minimum
wage in July. Output per hour rose sharply in the
second and third quarters, contributing to a sizable decline in unit labor costs so far this year.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
Market participants largely anticipated the decisions by
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the
September meeting to leave the target range for the
federal funds rate unchanged and to extend the Federal
Reserve’s purchases of agency MBS and agency debt
through the end of the first quarter of 2010 to allow for
a gradual reduction in the pace of these purchases. The
announcement of the Committee’s intent to purchase
the full $1.25 trillion of agency MBS securities reduced
some uncertainty about the cumulative amount of these
purchases. After the release of the statement, investors
marked down their expected path for the federal funds
rate slightly; over subsequent weeks, that initial reaction
was largely reversed so that, on balance, the expected
path appeared to change little over the intermeeting
period. Yields on nominal Treasury securities were
about unchanged on net. Inflation compensation
based on five-year Treasury inflation-protected securi-

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009
ties (TIPS) rose over the intermeeting period, apparently owing in part to an increase in oil and other commodity prices, while five-year inflation compensation
five years ahead was little changed.
Overall conditions in short-term funding markets eased
a bit further during the intermeeting period. Spreads
between London interbank offered rates (Libor) and
overnight index swap (OIS) rates at the one- and threemonth maturities were about unchanged and were near
their pre-crisis levels. Spreads at the six-month maturity narrowed but remained elevated. Spreads on
A2/P2-rated commercial paper (CP) and AA-rated asset-backed CP remained at the lower ends of their respective ranges over the past two years. Indicators of
Treasury market functioning, including on-the-run liquidity premiums for the 10-year Treasury note and
trading volumes in both the nominal and TIPS markets, showed some signs of improvement over the intermeeting period, but trading conditions remained
somewhat impaired. Year-end pressures in funding
markets generally appeared modest. However, some
evidence pointed to increased demand for Treasury
securities that mature soon after the turn of the year.
Broad stock price indexes were about unchanged, on
net, over the intermeeting period despite initial thirdquarter earnings reports that mostly beat analysts’ forecasts. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index
moved up slightly. The spread between an estimate of
the expected real return on equity over the next 10
years for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the real 10year Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk
premium—remained elevated. Corporate bond spreads
narrowed further as yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds decreased more than those
on comparable-maturity Treasury securities. Bid-asked
spreads for corporate bonds—a measure of liquidity in
this market—remained at moderate levels. Conditions
in the secondary market for leveraged syndicated loans
continued to improve, as secondary-market prices rose
and bid-asked spreads narrowed.
Investor sentiment toward the banking sector appeared
to deteriorate over the intermeeting period. Bank share
prices fell, with equity prices for large banks declining
more than those for regional and smaller banks. Credit
default swap spreads for large bank holding companies
were about flat, but they widened for regional and
smaller banking organizations. Market participants
reportedly remained concerned about the earnings
prospects for banks in an environment of weak economic activity and rising loan losses.

Page 5

Debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sector appeared to have declined again in the third quarter, as
estimates suggested that household debt edged down
and nonfinancial business debt decreased. Consumer
credit contracted for the seventh consecutive month in
August, reflecting declines in both revolving and nonrevolving credit; issuance of consumer credit assetbacked securities also fell. Gross issuance of bonds by
investment-grade nonfinancial corporations slowed
somewhat in October, even as speculative-grade firms
continued to issue bonds at a robust pace. CP outstanding increased, though gains were concentrated at a
few large issuers. Bank loans continued to contract
rapidly. In contrast, the federal government continued
to issue debt at a brisk pace, and gross issuance of state
and local government debt remained strong in October.
Bank credit declined in September and in the first half
of October, as the contraction in C&I loans contributed importantly to a further decline in total loans
over the period. According to the SLOOS, bank lending standards and terms tightened further and demand
continued to decline, on net, for most types of loans in
the third quarter. Commercial real estate (CRE) loans
also continued to decrease, reportedly because of widespread paydowns and charge-offs. In addition, residential mortgage loans on banks’ books fell, and revolving
home equity loans and consumer loans also contracted.
The pace of decline in total loans at large banks continued to exceed that at smaller banks. The allowance for
loan and lease losses rose further at large banks in September, but it was about unchanged at small banks.
M2 appeared to have expanded at a moderate rate in
September and October. While liquid deposits rose
rapidly, small time deposits and retail money market
mutual funds continued to contract. Meanwhile, currency increased amid moderate demand for U.S. currency from abroad.
Stock indexes fell over the intermeeting period in most
major industrial economies, while 10-year sovereign
yields declined in Europe and were little changed in
Japan and Canada. Equity prices were mixed in emerging markets, and credit spreads on emerging market
sovereign debt edged up. The trade-weighted index of
the foreign exchange value of the dollar was little
changed over the intermeeting period. The Reserve
Bank of Australia and Norges Bank raised their policy
rates, while most other central banks left their respective policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting period. The European Central Bank, the Bank of Eng-

Page 6

Federal Open Market Committee

land, and the Bank of Japan continued implementing
their special liquidity and asset purchase programs, although Bank of Japan officials indicated they would let
some credit-easing programs expire at the end of the
year.
Staff Economic Outlook
In the forecast prepared for the November FOMC
meeting, the staff raised its projection for real GDP
growth over the second half of 2009 but left the forecast for output growth in 2010 and 2011 roughly unchanged. The spending and production data received
during the intermeeting period suggested that economic activity, especially household spending, was a little
stronger in the summer than previously estimated. Also, industrial production increased more than had been
anticipated at the September meeting. But with labor
market conditions somewhat weaker than anticipated,
earlier declines in wealth still weighing on household
balance sheets, and measures of consumer sentiment
relatively low, the staff did not take much signal from
the recent unexpected strength in spending and output.
Indeed, the staff boosted its projection for the unemployment rate over the next several years. Still, the
staff continued to believe that several factors that were
restraining spending would gradually fade. The staff
anticipated that the strengthening of the recovery in
real output during 2010 and 2011 would be supported
by an ongoing improvement in financial conditions and
household balance sheets, continued recovery in the
housing sector, improved household and business confidence, and accommodative monetary policy even as
the impetus to real activity from fiscal policy diminished.
The staff forecast for inflation was little changed from
the September meeting. Although oil prices moved
higher, likely boosting near-term inflation, the staff also
revised up its estimate of the degree of slack in the
economy, leaving the forecast for total and core PCE
inflation over the next two years little changed. With
significant underutilization of resources expected to
persist for several years, the staff continued to project
that core inflation would slow somewhat further over
the next two years.
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
Economic Outlook
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
participants—the five members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for

_

each year from 2009 through 2012 and over a longer
horizon. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
would be expected to converge over time under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over
the longer run are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is attached as an addendum
to these minutes.
In the meeting participants’ discussion of the economic
situation and outlook, they agreed that the incoming
data and information received from business contacts
suggested that economic activity was picking up as anticipated, with output continuing to expand in the
fourth quarter. A number of factors were expected to
support near-term growth: Business inventories were
being brought into better alignment with sales, and the
pace of inventory runoff was slowing; activity in the
housing sector appeared to be turning up, and house
prices seemed to be leveling out or beginning to rise by
some measures; consumer spending appeared to be
rising even apart from the effects of fiscal incentives to
purchase autos; the outlook for growth abroad had
improved since earlier in the year, auguring well for
U.S. exports; and U.S. and global financial market conditions, while roughly unchanged over the intermeeting
period, were substantially better than earlier in the year.
Above-trend output growth in the third quarter was a
welcome development. Moreover, the upturn in real
GDP appeared to reflect stronger final demand and not
just a slower pace of inventory decumulation. While
these developments were positive, participants noted
that it was not clear how much of the recent firming in
final demand reflected the effects of temporary fiscal
programs to support the auto and housing sectors, and
some participants expressed concerns about the ability
of the economy to generate a self-sustaining recovery
without government support. Nonetheless, participants expected the recovery to continue in subsequent
quarters, although at a pace that would be rather slow
relative to historical experience, particularly the robust
recoveries that followed previous steep downturns.
Such a modest pace of expansion would imply only
slow improvement in the labor market next year, with
unemployment remaining high. Indeed, participants
noted that business contacts continued to report plans
to be cautious in hiring and capital spending even as
demand for their products increased. Nonetheless,
economic growth was expected to strengthen during
the next two years as housing construction continued
to rise and financial conditions improved further, lead-

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009

Page 7

ing to more-substantial increases in resource utilization
in product and labor markets.

ing at small businesses, which are normally a source of
employment growth in recoveries.

Most participants now viewed the risks to their growth
forecasts as being roughly balanced rather than tilted to
the downside, but uncertainty surrounding these forecasts was still viewed as quite elevated. Downside risks
to growth included the continued weakness in the labor
market and its implications for income growth and
consumer confidence, as well as the potential for credit
availability to remain relatively tight for consumers and
some businesses. In this regard, some participants
noted the difficulty that smaller, bank-dependent firms
were having in securing financing. The CRE sector
was also considered a downside risk to the forecast and
a possible source of increased pressure on banks. On
the other hand, consumer spending on items other
than autos had been stronger than expected, which
might be signaling more underlying momentum in the
recovery and some chance that the step-up in spending
would be sustained going forward. In addition, growth
abroad had exceeded expectations for some time, potentially providing more support to U.S. exports and
domestic growth than anticipated.

The weakness in labor market conditions remained an
important concern to meeting participants, with unemployment expected to remain elevated for some time.
Although the pace of job losses was moderating, the
unusually large fraction of those who were working
part time for economic reasons and the unusually low
level of the average workweek pointed to only a gradual
decline in the unemployment rate as the economic recovery proceeded. In addition, business contacts reported that they would be cautious in their hiring and
would continue to aggressively seek cost savings in the
absence of revenue growth. Indeed, participants expected that businesses would be able to meet any increases in demand in the near term by raising their employees’ hours and boosting productivity, thus delaying
the need to add to their payrolls; this view was supported by aggregate data indicating rapid productivity
growth in recent quarters. Moreover, the need to reallocate labor across sectors as the recovery proceeds, as
well as losses of skills caused by high levels of longterm unemployment and permanent separations, could
limit the pace of gains in employment. Participants
discussed the possibility that this recovery could resemble the past two, which were characterized by a
slow pace of hiring for a time even after aggregate demand picked up.

Financial market developments over recent months
were generally regarded as supportive of continued
economic recovery, with equity prices considerably
higher, private credit spreads substantially lower, and
financial markets generally performing significantly better than earlier in the year. Participants noted, however, that bank credit remained tight. With rising levels
of nonperforming loans expected to continue to be a
source of stress, and with many regional and small
banks vulnerable to the deteriorating performance of
CRE loans, banks continued to tighten lending standards for C&I loans and consumer loans, although the
net percentage of banks reporting further tightening in
each category had fallen in recent surveys. Bank loans
continued to contract sharply in all categories. Participants noted that the dichotomy between significant
easing of conditions in capital markets and continuing
tight conditions in the banking sector implied that financing conditions differed for large and small firms.
Large firms with access to debt and equity markets for
financing had relatively little difficulty in obtaining
credit and in many cases also had high levels of retained earnings with which to fund their operations and
investment. In contrast, smaller firms, which tend to
be more dependent on commercial banks for financing,
reportedly faced substantial constraints in their access
to credit. Limited credit availability, along with weak
aggregate demand, was viewed as likely to restrain hir-

The prospect for continued weakness in labor markets
remained an important factor in the outlook for consumer spending. Although consumer spending had
picked up more than expected in recent months, participants saw that increase as partly reflecting special factors such as the cash-for-clunkers program. Uncertain
job prospects, slow income growth, and tight credit, as
well as wealth levels that remained relatively low despite the recent rise in equity prices and stabilization in
house prices, were seen as weighing on consumer confidence and the growth of consumer spending for some
time to come. In such an environment, households’
saving behavior was an important source of uncertainty
in the outlook. Participants continued to believe that
the most likely outcome was for the saving rate to remain near its average level over the past few quarters or
to edge up gradually. However, they could not completely discount the possibility of a further substantial
rise in the saving rate as households took further steps
to repair their balance sheets.
Participants noted that firms seemed to be reducing
inventories at a slower pace than earlier in the year and

Page 8

Federal Open Market Committee

apparently had made substantial progress in reducing
stocks toward desired levels. With inventories lower,
firms were beginning to raise production to meet at
least a portion of increased demand, and this adjustment was expected to make an important contribution
to economic recovery in the fourth quarter of the year
and, to a lesser extent, in 2010 as well. Investment in
E&S appeared to have stabilized in the third quarter,
and recent data on new orders continued to point to a
pickup next year. However, many participants expressed the view that cautious business sentiment, together with low industrial utilization rates, was likely to
keep new capital spending subdued until firms became
more confident about the durability of increases in demand.
In the residential real estate sector, home sales and construction increased over recent months from very low
levels; moreover, house prices appeared to be stabilizing and in some areas had reportedly moved higher.
Generally, the outlook was for these trends to continue.
However, some participants still viewed the improvements as quite tentative, pointing to potential sources
of softness from the pending termination of the temporary tax credit for first-time homebuyers, the
winding down of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
purchase program, and the downward pressure that
anticipated further increases in foreclosures would put
on house prices. In contrast to developments in the
residential sector, CRE activity continued to fall markedly in most Districts as a result of deteriorating fundamentals, including declining occupancy and rental
rates and very tight credit conditions.
Stronger foreign economic activity, especially in Asia,
as well as the partial reversal this year of the dollar’s
appreciation during the latter part of 2008, was providing support to U.S. exports. Participants noted that the
recent fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar
had been orderly and appeared to reflect an unwinding
of safe-haven demand in light of the recovery in financial market conditions this year, but that any tendency
for dollar depreciation to intensify or to put significant
upward pressure on inflation would bear close watching. Further improvements in foreign economies
would likely buoy U.S. exports going forward, but as
the recovery took hold in the United States, import
growth would also strengthen.
Participants continued to discuss the appropriate
weights to place on resource slack, inflation expectations, and other factors in assessing the inflation outlook. In the near term, most participants anticipated

_

that substantial slack in both labor and product markets
would likely keep inflation subdued. Indeed, the considerable decelerations in wages and unit labor costs this
year were cited as factors putting downward pressure
on inflation. However, some participants noted that
the recent rise in the prices of oil and other commodities, as well as increases in import prices stemming
from the decline in the foreign exchange value of the
dollar, could boost inflation pressures. Overall, many
participants viewed the risks to their inflation outlooks
over the next few quarters as being roughly balanced.
Some saw the risks as tilted to the downside in the near
term, reflecting the quite elevated level of economic
slack and the possibility that inflation expectations
could begin to decline in response to the low level of
actual inflation. But others felt that risks were tilted to
the upside over a longer horizon, because of the possibility that inflation expectations could rise as a result of
the public’s concerns about extraordinary monetary
policy stimulus and large federal budget deficits.
Moreover, these participants noted that banks might
seek to reduce appreciably their excess reserves as the
economy improves by purchasing securities or by easing credit standards and expanding their lending substantially. Such a development, if not offset by Federal
Reserve actions, could give additional impetus to
spending and, potentially, to actual and expected inflation. To keep inflation expectations anchored, all participants agreed that it was important for policy to be
responsive to changes in the economic outlook and for
the Federal Reserve to continue to clearly communicate
its ability and intent to begin withdrawing monetary
policy accommodation at the appropriate time and
pace.
Committee Policy Action
In the members’ discussion of monetary policy for the
period ahead, they agreed that no substantive changes
to the Committee’s federal funds target range or largescale asset purchase programs were warranted at this
meeting. On balance, the economic outlook had
changed little since the September meeting. The recovery appeared to be continuing and was expected to
gradually strengthen over time. Still, most members
projected that over the next couple of years, the unemployment rate would remain quite elevated and the level of inflation would remain below rates consistent over
the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s objectives.
Based on this outlook, members decided to maintain
the federal funds target range at 0 to ¼ percent and to
continue to state their expectation that economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates

Minutes of the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009
for an extended period. Low levels of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations were among the important factors underlying their expectation for monetary policy, and members
agreed that policy communications would be enhanced
by citing these conditions in the policy statement.
Members noted the possibility that some negative side
effects might result from the maintenance of very low
short-term interest rates for an extended period, including the possibility that such a policy stance could lead
to excessive risk-taking in financial markets or an unanchoring of inflation expectations. While members
currently saw the likelihood of such effects as relatively
low, they would remain alert to these risks. All agreed
that the path of short-term rates going forward would
be dependent on the evolution of the economic outlook.
With respect to the large-scale asset purchase programs, all members supported reiterating the Committee’s intention to purchase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS
by the end of the first quarter of 2010. The Committee
also agreed to specify that its agency debt purchases
would cumulate to about $175 billion by the end of the
first quarter, $25 billion less than the previously announced maximum for these purchases. Owing to the
limited availability of agency debt and concerns that
larger purchases could impair market functioning, the
Committee’s transactions in these instruments for some
time had been on a trajectory that would leave total
purchases somewhat below the previously established
maximum. Announcing that purchases would total
about $175 billion was viewed as providing greater clarity to the public regarding the expected amount of purchases and would not reflect a decision to scale back
the degree of policy accommodation. Members also
decided to reiterate their intention to gradually slow the
pace of the Committee’s agency MBS and agency debt
purchases to promote a smooth transition in markets as
the announced purchases are completed. The Committee agreed that it would continue to evaluate the timing
and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in
light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions
in financial markets.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive:
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will

Page 9

foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
in reserve markets consistent with federal
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase
agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing
support to private credit markets and economic activity. The timing and pace of these
purchases should depend on conditions in
the markets for such securities and on a
broader assessment of private credit market
conditions. The Desk is expected to execute
purchases of about $175 billion in housingrelated agency debt and about $1.25 trillion
of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter
of 2010. The Desk is expected to gradually
slow the pace of these purchases as they near
completion. The Committee anticipates that
outright purchases of securities will cause the
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to
expand significantly in coming months. The
System Open Market Account Manager and
the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding
the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s
objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.”
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
“Information received since the Federal
Open Market Committee met in September
suggests that economic activity has continued to pick up. Conditions in financial markets were roughly unchanged, on balance,
over the intermeeting period. Activity in the
housing sector has increased over recent
months. Household spending appears to be
expanding but remains constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower
housing wealth, and tight credit. Businesses
are still cutting back on fixed investment and
staffing, though at a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory
stocks into better alignment with sales. Although economic activity is likely to remain
weak for a time, the Committee anticipates
that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary

Page 10

Federal Open Market Committee

stimulus, and market forces will support a
strengthening of economic growth and a
gradual return to higher levels of resource
utilization in a context of price stability.
With substantial resource slack likely to continue to dampen cost pressures and with
longer-term inflation expectations stable, the
Committee expects that inflation will remain
subdued for some time.
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve
will continue to employ a wide range of tools
to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability. The Committee will
maintain the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to
anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued
inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To provide support to mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit
markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a
total of $1.25 trillion of agency mortgagebacked securities and about $175 billion of
agency debt. The amount of agency debt
purchases, while somewhat less than the previously announced maximum of $200 billion,
is consistent with the recent path of purchases and reflects the limited availability of
agency debt. In order to promote a smooth
transition in markets, the Committee will
gradually slow the pace of its purchases of

_

both agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities and anticipates that these
transactions will be executed by the end of
the first quarter of 2010. The Committee
will continue to evaluate the timing and
overall amounts of its purchases of securities
in light of the evolving economic outlook
and conditions in financial markets. The
Federal Reserve is monitoring the size and
composition of its balance sheet and will
make adjustments to its credit and liquidity
programs as warranted.”
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
Voting against this action: None.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, December 1516, 2009. The meeting adjourned at 12:40 p.m. on November 4, 2009.
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on October 13, 2009, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
FOMC meeting held on September 22-23, 2009.

_____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Secretary

Page 1

Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the November 3-4, 2009, FOMC
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections for output growth, unemployment,
and inflation for the years 2009 to 2012 and over the
longer run. The projections were based on information
available through the end of the meeting and on each
participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be
expected to converge over time under appropriate
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks.
As depicted in Figure 1, FOMC participants anticipated
that economic recovery would be gradual, with real
gross domestic product (GDP) growing at a moderate
pace and the unemployment rate declining slowly over
the next few years. Most participants also expected
that inflation would remain subdued over this period.
As indicated in Table 1, participants marked up their
projections for real GDP growth in 2009, reflecting a
faster pickup in output during the second half of the
year than they had anticipated at the time of their previous forecasts, which were made in conjunction with

the June FOMC meeting. Looking beyond 2009, the
contours of the participants’ outlook for economic activity and inflation were broadly similar to those in their
June projections, with the pace of the economic recovery expected to be restrained by household and business uncertainty, weak labor market conditions, and
slow waning of tight credit conditions in the banking
system. Most participants anticipated that about five or
six years would be needed for the economy to converge
fully to a longer-run path characterized by a sustainable
rate of output growth and by rates of unemployment
and inflation consistent with their interpretation of the
Federal Reserve’s objectives. However, some participants indicated that the convergence process might
well require even longer, while a few expected that although inflation would settle at its longer-run rate in
the next several years, the convergence process for the
real economy was likely to occur over a somewhat
longer period. With a further waning of downside risks
to growth since June, nearly all participants now judged
the risks to their growth outlook as roughly balanced,
and most also saw roughly balanced risks surrounding
their inflation projections. As in June, however, participants generally judged that their projections for economic activity and inflation were subject to an unusually high degree of uncertainty relative to historical
norms.
The Outlook
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2009
had a central tendency of negative 0.4 percent to negative 0.1 percent, around a percentage point above the

Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, November 2009
Percent
Variable

Range2

Central tendency1
2009

2010

2011

2012

Longer run

2009

2010

2011

2012

Longer run

Change in real GDP . . -0.4 to -0.1 2.5 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5
June projection. . . -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6

3.5 to 4.8
n.a.

2.5 to 2.8 -0.5 to 0.0 2.0 to 4.0
2.5 to 2.7 -1.6 to -0.6 0.8 to 4.0

2.5 to 4.6
2.3 to 5.0

2.8 to 5.0
n.a.

2.4 to 3.0
2.4 to 2.8

Unemployment rate. . . 9.9 to 10.1 9.3 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.6
June projection. . . 9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8

6.8 to 7.5
n.a.

5.0 to 5.2
4.8 to 5.0

9.8 to 10.3 8.6 to 10.2
9.7 to 10.5 8.5 to 10.6

7.2 to 8.7
6.8 to 9.2

6.1 to 7.6
n.a.

4.8 to 6.3
4.5 to 6.0

PCE inflation. . . . . . . .
June projection. . .
Core PCE inflation3. .
June projection. . .

1.7 to 2.0
1.7 to 2.0

1.0 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.8 0.9 to 2.0

0.6 to 2.4
0.5 to 2.5

0.2 to 2.3
n.a.

1.5 to 2.0
1.5 to 2.1

1.3 to 1.6 0.9 to 2.0
1.2 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0

0.5 to 2.4
0.2 to 2.5

0.2 to 2.3
n.a.

1.1 to 1.2
1.0 to 1.4

1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9
1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0

1.2 to 1.9
n.a.

1.4 to 1.5
1.3 to 1.6

1.0 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.6
1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7

1.0 to 1.7
n.a.

NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the
fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of
further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 23-24, 2009.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

Page 2

Federal Open Market Committee

_

Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Percent

Change in real GDP

5

Central tendency of projections
Range of projections

4
3
2

Actual

1
+
0
_
1
2

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Longer
run
Percent

Unemployment rate

10
9
8
7
6
5

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Longer
run
Percent

PCE inflation
3

2

1

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Longer
run
Percent

Core PCE inflation
3

2

1

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

2012

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009
central tendency of their June projections. The projections for the year as a whole were broadly consistent
with participants’ previous expectations that economic
activity would bottom out around midyear. However,
the contraction over the first half was a bit sharper than
many participants had anticipated at the time of the
June FOMC meeting, which took place about a month
before the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) published its advance estimate of second-quarter GDP and
its comprehensive revision of previous estimates, including a substantial downward revision to the estimate
of first-quarter GDP growth. Subsequent data on consumer spending, housing starts, and industrial production, as well as the advance estimate of third-quarter
GDP, suggested that the economy was growing at a
moderate pace over the second half of the year. Participants took note of the continuing improvement in
financial market conditions, the progress that businesses appeared to be making in bringing inventories into
line with sales, and the signs of stronger growth abroad,
especially in Asia. Participants also indicated that GDP
growth in the second half of 2009 had likely been
boosted by transitory factors such as the “cash-forclunkers” program and the first-time homebuyers’
credit, which had brought forward spending that would
have otherwise occurred in subsequent quarters.
Looking beyond this year, participants’ outlook for real
GDP growth was generally similar to that reflected in
their June forecasts. The central tendency of their output growth projections was 2.5 to 3.5 percent for 2010,
3.4 to 4.5 percent for 2011, and 3.5 to 4.8 percent for
2012. Participants indicated that consumer spending
would likely be bolstered by the turnaround in housing
prices, further increases in equity values, and gradual
improvements in credit availability. With an improved
sales outlook, businesses would rebuild their inventory
stocks and spending on equipment and software would
pick up; in addition, exports would likely receive a significant boost from stronger global growth. Monetary
and fiscal stimulus would provide further support to
aggregate demand next year. Nevertheless, the pace of
expansion would probably be damped for some time
by elevated uncertainty on the part of households and
businesses and by the slow and lagging recovery of labor markets, which would hold down income growth
and limit any rebound in household confidence. In
addition, distress in commercial real estate markets
would likely weigh further on the balance sheets of
banking institutions, thereby contributing to continued
tight credit conditions for many households and smaller firms. However, participants anticipated that the

Page 3

recovery would gather steam in 2011 and 2012 as a
consequence of further improvements in consumer and
business confidence and in the condition of financial
markets and institutions. In the absence of any further
shocks, participants generally expected that the economy would converge over time to a sustainable path
with real GDP growing at a rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent,
reflecting longer-term demographic trends and improvements in labor productivity.
Participants generally anticipated that the unemployment rate would rise somewhat further during the final
months of 2009 and then decline steadily over the next
few years. Their projections for the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2009 had a central tendency of 9.9 to 10.1 percent, somewhat higher
than the actual unemployment rate of 9.8 percent in
September—the latest reading available at the time of
the November FOMC meeting. Participants noted
that, as in the early stages of previous recoveries the
unemployment rate was continuing to rise after output
turned up, reflecting firms’ uncertainty about the pace
of recovery and their efforts to raise productivity and
hold down costs. Looking further ahead, participants’
unemployment rate projections had a central tendency
of 9.3 to 9.7 percent for the fourth quarter of 2010, 8.2
to 8.6 percent for the end of 2011, and 6.8 to 7.5 percent for the final quarter of 2012. A number of participants made modest upward revisions to their estimates
of the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment in
light of their assessments of the extent to which ongoing structural adjustments would be associated with
somewhat higher labor market frictions. Thus, participants’ longer-run unemployment rate projections had a
central tendency of 5.0 to 5.2 percent, about a quarter
percentage point higher than in June.
The central tendency of participants’ projections for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in
2009 was 1.1 to 1.2 percent, and the central tendency of
their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.4 to 1.5
percent.1 While actual PCE inflation over the first half
of the year turned out to be somewhat lower than participants had anticipated at the time of the June FOMC
meeting, recent increases in energy prices led most of
them to make upward revisions to their second-half
In July 2009, the BEA adjusted the definition of core PCE
inflation to include prices for food consumed at restaurants
and other establishments away from home. FOMC participants indicated that this definitional adjustment did not
cause any material changes in their core inflation projections
for 2009 or beyond.

1

Page 4

Federal Open Market Committee

inflation forecasts; thus, participants’ PCE inflation
projections for the year as a whole were broadly similar
to their previous forecasts. Core PCE inflation was 1.6
percent at an annual rate over the first half of 2009,
about a quarter point lower than most participants had
anticipated last June, and nearly all participants projected that core PCE inflation would decline further to
an annual rate of about 1¼ percent in the second half.
Looking beyond this year, participants generally anticipated that inflation would remain subdued. The central tendency of their projections for PCE inflation was
1.3 to 1.6 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.9 percent for 2011,
and 1.2 to 1.9 percent for 2012, and the central tendency of their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.0 to
1.5 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.6 percent for 2011, and
1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012. Many participants stated
that well-anchored inflation expectations would play an
important role in avoiding further declines in inflation
over the next few years despite the persistence of sizable resource slack. Participants also pointed out that
strong global growth was likely to place significant upward pressure on the prices of energy and other commodities; as a consequence, their projections for overall
inflation over the next several years were generally a
notch higher than their projections for core inflation.
As in June, the central tendency of projections for PCE
inflation over the longer run was 1.7 to 2.0 percent,
reflecting participants’ assessments of the measured
rate of inflation that would best satisfy the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate of maximum employment and
stable prices. Most participants expected that inflation
in 2012 would remain below its longer-run value, but a
few expected inflation to have converged to its longerrun value by that time.
Uncertainty and Risks
As in June, nearly all participants judged the degree of
uncertainty surrounding their projections of output
growth and unemployment as higher than historical
norms.2 Participants generally saw the risks to these
projections as roughly balanced, although a few indicated that the risks to the unemployment outlook remained weighted to the upside. In explaining these
judgments, participants highlighted the intrinsic diffiTable 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008. At
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

2

_

Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
Percentage points

Variable
Change in real

2009

2010

2011

2012

.....

±0.6

±1.4

±1.6

±1.5

.....

±0.2

±0.7

±0.9

±1.1

±0.5

±1.0

±1.0

±1.0

GDP1

Unemployment

rate1

Total consumer

prices2

....

NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP,
unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in
David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of
the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
fourth quarter of the year indicated.

culties in predicting the dynamics of the economy following a financial crisis and a severe recession. Participants noted that the recent pickup in economic growth
might reflect stronger underlying momentum in economic activity than anticipated and hence point to a
faster pace of recovery going forward. On the other
hand, participants referred to the possibility that deteriorating performance of commercial real estate and consumer loans could have adverse effects on the financial
system that would damp the growth of output and employment over coming quarters.
Most participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as unusually high,
although a few viewed the extent of such uncertainty as
roughly in line with historical norms. Participants generally judged the risks to the inflation outlook to be
roughly balanced, and many of them indicated that
these risks were linked, at least in part, to the risks associated with the economic outlook. Participants cited
the risk that longer-term inflation expectations might
start drifting downward in response to persistent economic slack and low inflation outcomes; alternatively,
those expectations could shift upwards in response to a
sharper recovery, especially if extraordinary monetary
policy stimulus were not unwound in a timely fashion.
Participants also noted the possibility that an acceleration in global economic activity could induce a surge in
the prices of energy and other commodities that would
place upward pressure on headline inflation.
Diversity of Views
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and over the longer run. The
dispersion in these projections reflects, among other
factors, differences in the participants’ assessments regarding the current degree of underlying momentum in
economic activity, the evolution of consumer and business sentiment, and the trajectory for private saving,
and in their interpretations of the continued weakness
in bank credit. The distribution of participants’ GDP
growth projections for 2009 shifted upward about a
percentage point and became narrower in response to
the economic and financial information received since
the June FOMC meeting. Most participants only
shaded up their growth projections for 2010, but a few
participants made more substantial upward revisions;
hence the lowest points in the distribution increased
markedly while the median was just a notch higher than
in June. The distribution of growth projections for
2011 was little changed from June, while the distribution for 2012 was centered at a slightly higher rate than
for 2011 with about the same degree of dispersion. A
few participants made modest upward revisions to their
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of output
growth, producing a slight widening of the range for
these longer-run projections. Regarding participants’
unemployment rate projections, the distribution for
2009 narrowed but with roughly the same mode as in
June, while the distributions for 2010 and 2011 shifted
down a bit and narrowed somewhat. The distribution
of unemployment rate projections for 2012 exhibited
noticeably greater dispersion than for 2011. The distribution of longer-run unemployment rate projections

Page 5

was generally more tightly concentrated than in June,
reflecting modest upward revisions to some participants’ estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment to which the economy would converge under
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks.
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding information about the diversity of participants’ views regarding
the inflation outlook. For total PCE inflation, the distribution of participants’ projections for 2009 was narrower than in June, whereas the distributions of their
projections for 2010 and 2011 did not change significantly, and there was virtually no change in the distribution of longer-run projections. For core PCE inflation, participants’ projections for 2009 became more
tightly concentrated, while their projections for 2010
and 2011 were only slightly less dispersed than in June.
The distributions of total and core PCE inflation projections for 2012 exhibited somewhat greater dispersion than those for 2011. The dispersion in participants’ projections for 2010, 2011, and 2012 mainly reflected differences in their judgments regarding the
determinants of inflation, including their estimates of
prevailing resource slack and their assessments of the
extent to which that slack affects inflation outcomes
and expectations. In contrast, the relatively concentrated distribution of longer-run inflation projections
indicates substantial agreement among participants regarding the measured rate of inflation that best satisfies
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.

Page 6

Federal Open Market Committee

_

Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants

2009

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

November projections
June projections

-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2- 0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3

Percent range
Number of participants

2010

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2- 0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3

Percent range
Number of participants

2011

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2- 0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3

Percent range
Number of participants

2012

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2- 0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3

Percent range
Number of participants

Longer run

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2- 0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3

Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009

Page 7

Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants

2009

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

November projections
June projections

4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-10.2-10.4-10.64.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7

Percent range
Number of participants

2010

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-10.2-10.4-10.64.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7

Percent range
Number of participants

2011

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-10.2-10.4-10.64.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7

Percent range
Number of participants

2012

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-10.2-10.4-10.64.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7

Percent range
Number of participants

Longer run

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-10.2-10.4-10.64.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7

Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

Page 8

Federal Open Market Committee

_

Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants

2009

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

November projections
June projections

0.10.2

0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2010

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2011

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2012

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

Longer run

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of November 3-4, 2009

Page 9

Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–12
Number of participants

2009

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

November projections
June projections

0.10.2

0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2010

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2011

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Percent range
Number of participants

2012

0.10.2

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.30.4

0.50.6

0.70.8

0.91.0

1.11.2

1.31.4

Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

1.51.6

1.71.8

1.92.0

2.12.2

2.32.4

2.52.6

Page 10

Federal Open Market Committee

Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by
the members of the Board of Governors and
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
inform discussions of monetary policy among
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections,
however. The economic and statistical models
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world. And the future
path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events.
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy,
participants consider not only what appears to
be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the
economy should they occur.
Table 2 summarizes the average historical
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal
Open Market Committee. The projection
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the
considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3
percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty
attending those projections is similar to that

experienced in the past and the risks around
the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP
would expand within a range of 2.4 to 3.6 percent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 percent in
the second year, 1.4 to 4.6 in the third year and
1.5 to 4.5 percent in the fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for
overall inflation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in
the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the
second, third and fourth years.
Because current conditions may differ
from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to
whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each variable is greater than, smaller
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
to whether the risks to their projections are
weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
participants judge whether each variable is
more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views
about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated
with a particular projection rather than with
divergences across a number of different projections.

_

